# Migration Guide, Version 2.0 to 3.0

This document aims to serve as a guide for manually migrating your existing
Madison site that is lower than version 3.0, up to the 3.0 version. There have
been many changes, but below you can find a list of these changes as well as
steps you can follow to upgrade to the current version.

**If you wish to avoid the manual process, you can use the new Chef and Capistrano
setup for provisioning a server and deploying to it.** To do this, make sure to
back up your database for migration, then use [the deployment documentation
provided](/docs/DEPLOY.md) for instructions on getting up and running.

## Changes

### New file structure

In Madison 3.0, we fully separated the client and server side code. This allowed
us to focus on the server side as an API, and our client as an application that
consumes that API. In the future this would position Madison data and
interactivity to be utilized by third party applications.

In the top level directory you will see `/client` and `/server` folders, each
containing the respective code. At this point in time (3.0) the client is built
with Angular 1 and JavaScript, dependencies are managed with npm. The server
side is built with Laravel and PHP, dependencies managed with composer.

### Built assets no longer committed

In versions of Madison prior to 3.0 we required that you commit built versions
of front end assets to the git repo, as well as committing third party
dependencies installed using various package managers (bower, npm, and
composer). We realized this was an anti-pattern and have made some changes!

First of all, we removed the use of bower as a dependency manager and have
consolidated it's responsibilities into npm, lowering overall complexity. On top
of that we have removed the need to commit packages and built versions of the
front end assets.

These things are now git ignored and will continue to be so. No more making
sure to build and commit your assets before a deploy! It's recommended to build
the client each time you deploy a new version of your code. This process is
automated if you use the new Capistrano setup for deployment as well. (More on
that later).

### Customize your Madison instance!

Before many of the changes in Madison 3.0, to customize your own version of
Madison you had to maintain your own git fork of the codebase. If you wanted to
change styles, language, page content, etc, it required that you make changes to
files that were tracked in the git repository.

We've made serious headway on that front! You can now customize your Madison
instance using some git ignored files.

* `client/app/sass/custom/` holds custom sass files in here to override existing
  styles.
* `client/app/locales/custom/` holds custom locale (language) files in here to
  override language throughout the system.
* Custom content pages and nav links can now be managed by site administrators
  through the interface!

These changes will allow you to keep tracking from the primary Madison repo and
pulling in changes as we move forward without clobbering your instance-specific
customizations.

### Web server reconfiguration

Because the server and client code are served from different directories, the
apache / nginx configuration looks quite a bit different. To see an example of
what this should look like now, check out the [example apache
configuration](/docs/apache.conf.example) provided in our docs folder.

The main thing is that we want the client code to be the primary document root,
and have an alias set up that routes any requests prefixed with `/api` to the
server (Laravel) code.

You can also easily change whether you're looking at a development version of
the client or a built production version by changing the document root to either
`./client/app` for development or `./client/build` for production. This makes
for easy confirmation of a successful build!

### Document sponsorship moidel

Instead of having a separate construct for "independent sponsors" vs "group
sponsors", we simplified the model by merging the handling of "independent
sponsors" into the groups model. Now when a user becomes and independent
sponsor, they are being put into a specially marked group under the title of
their own name. This simplifies handling of document sponsorship related
permissions.

### Summarize annotation model unification

...

### Make tasks

Due to the split of client and server code and the fact that each piece of the
codebase has it's own dependency manager and build tools, we have added a root
level `Makefile` containing common tasks. Here are some tasks of note:

* `make` - The default task runs `deps` and `build-client`. This will put your
  application in a ready to operate state.
* `make deps` - Installs all dependencies through the system, including
  composer, npm, rubygems, and berks (for Chef).
* `make build-client` - Runs the command to build the client code! To see what's
  involved in this task, checkout `client/scripts/build.sh`.
* `make test` - This will run the whole test suite, both client and server
  tests. More on this in the next section.
* `make db-migrate` - Runs any pending migrations on the database.
* `make db-reset` - Scraps current database, rebuilds it, migrates and seeds
  with data.
* `make queue-listen` - This will launch the background job processor for
  Laravel. Needed for notification handling.
* `make watch` - Runs the npm watch command to detect files changes and
  reprocess where necessary.
* `make chef-prepare` - More on this in the following section on Chef.
* `make chef-cook` - More on this in the following section on Chef.

Of course, you can check out the [top level `Makefile`](Makefile) to see under
the hood and find out what's happening with each of these tasks.

### Running tests

We've made significant progress on our automated testing setup, including
automated test running on GitHub pushes using
[Travis](travis-ci.org/opengovfoundation/madison). There are currently two
levels of tests that are being written / run: client side full integration
tests and server side API integration tests.

* `client/tests/e2e/` contains client integration tests.
* `server/tests/functional/` contains API integration tests.

Client integration tests will test the whole stack of the application. This
means it's expecting a test version of the API server to be up and running for
it to test against. We recommend setting up another Apache (or nginx) virtual
host configured solely for testing. This would point to a different database as
well.

To run the whole test suite (client and server), run `make test`. You can also
individually test just client or just server using `make test-client` and `make
test-server` respectively.

### Provision and deploy w/ chef and cap

A major goal of Madison 3.0 is to ease the process of standing up and managing
your own instance of Madison. The customization work covered above was one piece
of this. Another piece is the automated server provisioning using
[Chef](https://www.chef.io/) and easier deployment using
[Capistrano](http://capistranorb.com)

Instead of covering everything involved in the process here, we've created a
document with instructions on setting up, provisioning, and deploying to a
server using these tools in `docs/DEPLOY.md`.

## Suggested upgrade path

What follows are some steps you can follow to upgrade an existing Madison
instance from it's current version to the 3.0 version. Because there are some
major changes to how the project is structured, you will want to take extra care
to ensure that everything works accordingly.

### Backup current codebase & database

Make sure to create a backup copy of your current codebase, and a dump of your
current database, should anything go awry.

To copy your codebase, simply running the following command should be enough:

```
$ cp -r /path/to/madison/codebase /path/to/madison/codebase.backup
```

To backup your database, assuming you're using MySQL, use the following:

```
$ mysqldump --user=username -p database_name > madison_db_dump.sql
```

Make sure to have access to the DB dump file and keep it in a safe place. If
something goes wrong, you can simply import the database dump. It will restore
it to it's previous state. To restore, use this command:

```
$ mysql -u username -p database_name < madison_db_dump.sql
```

### Pull down Madison 3.0 code from GitHub!

You will want to pull in the changes for Madison 3.0 from our main GitHub repo,
located at https://github.com/opengovfoundation/madison. If your project is not
set up to track from the primary repo, you will want to add it as a remote:

```
$ git remote add opengovfoundation git@github.com:opengovfoundation/madison.git
```

Now you should be able to do:

```
$ git pull opengovfoundation master
```

This will pull down the master branch to your local instance. If you're doing
this in production *please make sure you have your codebase backed up as
mentioned above*!

This should put the new folder structure in place with your local project. To
confirm, make sure the top level directory has `client` and `server` folders,
and **does not** have a top level  `public` directory.

### Configuration

Previously, the primary configuration file is `.env` in the top level directory.
That file now resides in the `server` folder. You will want to move it to be in
the `server` folder and also check `server/.env.example` to make sure all
necessary things are configured.

Changes to note:

* `APP_KEY` - this needs to be 32 characters now due to a change in encryption
  settings.
* `QUEUE_DRIVER` - needs to be set to `database`, can pull from the example.
* `APP_URL` - should be set to the full HTTP base route of the application.

### Apache/Nginx configuration

You will need to update the apache configuration to match the new folder
structure. For a reference of what this should look like, there is an example
configuration file [included in the docs](/docs/apache.conf.example). There is
also an [nginx example configuration](/docs/nginx.conf.example).

Again, we recommend that you back up a copy of your current configuration.

### Run database migrations

Make sure to run database migrations, as there have been many changes in 3.0.
Some of the notable changes are:

* A new `jobs` table has been added for queue working
* Independent Sponsorship has been moved to a group only model
* New table for pages and page content
* Unification of data model for annotations / comments / replies

For your convenience, a top level Makefile contains the command necessary to
migrate your database:

```
$ make db-migrate
```

Alternatively, if you deploy using Capistrano (recommended) it should
automatically run the migrations after a successful deployment.


### Queue worker

In Madison 3.0, work has been done to make notifications functional. These
notifications are run in background jobs and require **queue workers** to be
running on the server for them to be processed.

There are a number of ways to go about this, but our recommendation is to use
[supervisor](http://supervisord.org/introduction.html) to ensure that the queue
workers are always running on your system.

You should use your OS's package manager to install supervisor:

```
$ sudo apt-get install supervisor
```

Replace `apt-get` with `yum` or `dnf` if you're not on a debian based
distribution.

From there, an example supervisor configuration looks like so:

```
[program:laravel-worker]
process_name=%(program_name)s_%(process_num)02d
command=php /path/to/madison/server/artisan queue:listen --sleep=3 --tries=3
autostart=true
autorestart=true
user=forge
numprocs=8
redirect_stderr=true
stdout_logfile=/path/to/madison/server/worker.log
```

For more information on queues, visit the [Laravel
documentation](https://laravel.com/docs/5.1/queues) regarding the subject.

### Customization

As mentioned previously, there have been major changes to how instance specific
customizations are handled within Madison 3.0. If you have any customized CSS or
locale (language) files, you will want to make sure to put them in the following
locations:

* Styles - `client/app/sass/custom/*.scss`
* Language - `client/app/locales/custom/*.json`

**Note:** There is a new `make` task for building assets - `make build-client`.

Beyond styles and language, we've also added a new way to handle custom content
pages! You will want to make sure to get a copy of the content for any content
pages you have in your instance so you can recreate them using this method.

* Log in as an administrator
* Under the "Admin" dropdown menu, choose "Edit Pages"
* Click to create a page, give it a title
* Configure the settings

**Note:** The configuration options available allow you to make it an external
link, and even choose whether to show the link in both the header and/or footer
of the site.
